#labels R4000,Phase-Design
=CPU - R4000 The psp processor=

R4000 is a RISC MIPS processor, has 32 registers of general purpose (R0 to R31) 
and 3 for special purpose (PC, HI and LO).
The clock is clocked from 1 to 333MHz, the processor counts with helpers CoProcessors.

==Registers==
 # 32 general purpose (*r0 to r31*)
 # *PC* a program counter register
 # *HI* holds the higher results from divide or multiply operation
 # *LO* holds the lower results from divide or multiply operation

----
_At Multiply operation_

The product of integer multiply operation. (*HI* and *LO*)

_At Divide operation_

The quotient is stored on *LO* and the remainder is stored on *HI*.
----
*from 32 general purpose:*

||*r0* = hardwired to value of zero, can be used as source when zero value is needed.||
||*r1* = assembler temp||
||*r2* = return value||
||*r3* = return value||
||*r4* = argument registers||
||*r5* = argument registers||
||*r6* = argument registers||
||*r7* = argument registers||
||*r8* = caller saved (o32 old style names: default)||
||*r9* = 	t1 	 ||
||*r10* =	t2 	 ||
||*r11* =	t3 	 ||
||*r12* =	t4 	caller saved||
||*r13* =	t5 	 ||
||*r14* =	t6 	 ||
||*r15* =	t7 	 ||
||*r16* =	s0 	callee saved||
||*r17* =	s1 	 ||
||*r18* =	s2 	 ||
||*r19* =	s3 	 ||
||*r20* =	s4 	 ||
||*r21* =	s5 	 ||
||*r22* =	s6 	 ||
||*r23* =	s7 	 ||
||*r24* = caller saved||
||*r25* = caller saved||
||*r26* = kernel temporary k0||
||*r27* = kernel temporary k0||
||*r28* = global pointer||
||*r29* = stack pointer||
||*r30* = frame pointer||
||*r31* = is used as link by Jump and Link instructions. (it should not be used by others instructions)||

ps: Almost all processor has the status regiter(s), but that one uses the coprocessor (*CP0*) to control stuffs.

==Instructions==

Each instruction (opcode+...) is a single 4Bytes (32bits) word.
ex:
||31||||30||||29||||28||||27||||26||||25||||24||||23||||22||||21||||20||||19||||18||||17||||16||||15||||14||||13||||12||||11||||10||||09||||08||||07||||06||||05||||04||||03||||02||||01||||00||

The opcode is 6 bites. ||31||||30||||29||||28||||27||||26||

===Types of instructions===

There is a three types of instructions format: (AKA addressing modes)
 # Immediate (imm)
 # Jump (j)
 # Register (r)

*When is Immediate* (imm) Format: *opcode* + *register[rs]* + *register[rt]* + *immediate*

||31||||30||||29||||28||||27||||26||||25||||24||||23||||22||||21||||20||||19||||18||||17||||16||||15||||14||||13||||12||||11||||10||||09||||08||||07||||06||||05||||04||||03||||02||||01||||00||

opcode = between 31 - 26 (include)

rs = between 25 - 21 (include)    

rt = between 20 - 16 (include)   

immediate = between 15 - 0 (include)                                    


 # opcode = instruction number 	        (6bites)
 # rs = register source 		(5bites) (one of 32 general propurse)
 # rt = register target 		(5bites) (one of 32 general propurse)
 # imm = immediate value 		(16bites)

ex:
ADDI R2,R5,0x11; (see and show a sample)


*When is Jump* (j) Format: *opcode* + *target*

||31||||30||||29||||28||||27||||26||||25||||24||||23||||22||||21||||20||||19||||18||||17||||16||||15||||14||||13||||12||||11||||10||||09||||08||||07||||06||||05||||04||||03||||02||||01||||00||

opcode = between 31 - 26 (include)

target = between 25 - 0 (include)

 # opcode = instruction number 	(6bites)
 # target = address to jump	(26bites)

ex: (see and show a sample)

*When is Register* (r)  Format: *opcode* + *register[rs]* + *register[rt]* + *register[rd]* + *sa* + *funct*

||31||||30||||29||||28||||27||||26||||25||||24||||23||||22||||21||||20||||19||||18||||17||||16||||15||||14||||13||||12||||11||||10||||09||||08||||07||||06||||05||||04||||03||||02||||01||||00||

opcode = between 31 - 26 (include)

rs = between 25 - 21 (include)

rt = between 20 - 16 (include)

rd = between 15 - 11 (include)

sa = between 10 - 6 (include)

funct = between 5 - 0 (include)

 # opcode = instruction number 	(6bites)
 # rs = register source 		(5bites) (one of 32 general propurse)
 # rt = register target 		(5bites) (one of 32 general propurse)
 # rd = register destination	(5bites) (one of 32 general propurse)
 # sa = shift amount 		(5bites)
 # funct = function filed 		(6bites)

ex: (see and shows a sample)

 * All Load and Store instructions uses the immediate way. (same for coprocessor)
 * Instructions that peforms: arithmetic, logical, shift, multiply and divide uses register and immediate way.
 * Special instructions performs system calls and breakpoint and these are always regiter way.
 * Excpetions instructions occurs in both way immediate and register.